subkey doc (#9639)
paritytech/substrate: bin/utils/subkey/README.md

    subkey inspect <mnemonic | seed | pubkey | address>

*Example Output*:

```
Secret Key URI `0xa05c75731970cc7868a2fb7cb577353cd5b31f62dccced92c441acd8fee0c92d` is account:
  Secret seed:      0xa05c75731970cc7868a2fb7cb577353cd5b31f62dccced92c441acd8fee0c92d
  Public key (hex): 0xfec70cfbf1977c6965b5af10a4534a6a35d548eb14580594d0bc543286892515
  Account ID:       0xfec70cfbf1977c6965b5af10a4534a6a35d548eb14580594d0bc543286892515
  SS58 Address:     5Hpm9fq3W3dQgwWpAwDS2ZHKAdnk86QRCu7iX4GnmDxycrte
```
### Signing

`subkey` allows using a **secret key** to sign a random message. The signature can then be verified by anyone using your **public key**:

    echo -n <msg> | subkey sign --suri <seed,mnemonic>

*Example*:

    MESSAGE=hello
    SURI=0xa05c75731970cc7868a2fb7cb577353cd5b31f62dccced92c441acd8fee0c92d
    echo -n $MESSAGE | subkey sign --suri $SURI

*outputs*:

    9201af3788ad4f986b800853c79da47155f2e08fde2070d866be4c27ab060466fea0623dc2b51f4392f4c61f25381a62848dd66c5d8217fae3858e469ebd668c

**NOTE**: Each run of the `sign` command with yield a different output. While each signature is different, they are all valid.

> ### Verifying a signature

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Verifying a signature
```

> Given a message, a signature and an address, `subkey` can verify whether the **message** has been digitally signed by the (or one of the ...) holder of the **private key** for the given **address**:

Reviewer 2: The ... threw my parsing!

```suggestion
Given a message, a signature and an address, `subkey` can verify whether the **message** has been digitally signed by the holder (or one of the holders) of the **private key** for the given **address**:
```

    echo -n <msg> | subkey verify <sig> <address>

*Example*:

    MESSAGE=hello
    URI=0xfec70cfbf1977c6965b5af10a4534a6a35d548eb14580594d0bc543286892515
    SIGNATURE=9201af3788ad4f986b800853c79da47155f2e08fde2070d866be4c27ab060466fea0623dc2b51f4392f4c61f25381a62848dd66c5d8217fae3858e469ebd668c
    echo -n $MESSAGE | subkey verify $SIGNATURE $URI

*outputs*:

    Signature verifies correctly.

A failure looks like:

    Error: SignatureInvalid

> ### Using the vanity generator

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Using the vanity generator
```

command:
```
subkey vanity --network polkadot --pattern bob
```

output:
```
Generating key containing pattern 'bob'
best: 190 == top: 189
Secret Key URI `0x8c9a73097f235b84021a446bc2826a00c690ea0be3e0d81a84931cb4146d6691` is account:
  Secret seed:      0x8c9a73097f235b84021a446bc2826a00c690ea0be3e0d81a84931cb4146d6691
  Public key (hex): 0x1a8b32e95c1f571118ea0b84801264c3c70f823e320d099e5de31b9b1f18f843
  Account ID:       0x1a8b32e95c1f571118ea0b84801264c3c70f823e320d099e5de31b9b1f18f843
  SS58 Address:     1bobYxBPjZWRPbVo35aSwci1u5Zmq8P6J2jpa4kkudBZMqE
```

`Bob` now got a nice address starting with his name: 1**bob**YxBPjZWRPbVo35aSwci1u5Zmq8P6J2jpa4kkudBZMqE.

**Note**: While `Bob`, having a short name (3 chars), got a result rather quickly, it will take much longer for `Alice` who has a much longer name, thus the chances to generate a random address that contains the chain `alice` will be much smaller.

### Signing a transaction

Sign a transaction from an encoded `Call`.

    subkey sign-transaction \
        --call <call-as-hex> \
        --nonce 0 \
        --suri <secret-uri> \
        --password <password> \
        --prior-block-hash <prior-block-hash-as-hex>

> Will output a signed and encoded `UncheckedMortalCompactExtrinsic` as hex.

Reviewer: can link to `UncheckedMortalCompactExtrinsic`?

Author: This seems to be an old part of the doc (2y) and I find no reference to `UncheckedMortalCompactExtrinsic` in substrate. Reading the code, it probably should reference `UncheckedExtrinsic` instead. So I could reference to https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/master/primitives/runtime/src/generic/unchecked_extrinsic.rs#L39-L49, would that work for you ?

Author: Done as mentioned above. Let me know if you meant something else.

# Subkey

Subkey is a commandline utility included with Substrate. It allows generating and restoring keys for Substrate based chains such as Polkadot, Kusama and a growing number of parachains and Substrate based projects.

`subkey` provides a few sub-commands to generate keys, check keys, sign messages, verify messages, etc...

> You can see the list of command with `subkey --help`. You can then see additional options per command with for instance `subkey generate --help` for the `generate` command.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can see the full list of commands with `subkey --help`. Most commands have additional help available with for instance `subkey generate --help` for the `generate` command.
```

## Satefy first

> `subkey` does not need any internet connection to work. For the best levels of security, you should be using `subkey` on a machine that is **not connected** to the internet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`subkey` does not need an internet connection to work. Indeed, for the best security, you should be using `subkey` on a machine that is **not connected** to the internet.
```

`subkey` deals with **seeds** and **private keys**. Make sure to use `subkey` in a safe environment (ie. no one looking over your shoulder) and on a safe computer (ie. no one able to check you commands history).

> If you save anything output of `subkey` into a file, make sure to apply proper permissions and delete the file as soon as possible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you save any output of `subkey` into a file, make sure to apply proper permissions and/or delete the file as soon as possible.
```

## Usage

The following guide explains *some* of the `subkey` commands. For the full list and the most up to date documentation, make sure to check the integrated help with `subkey --help`.

### Generate a random account

Generating a new key is as simple as running:

    subkey generate

The output looks similar to:

```
Secret phrase `hotel forest jar hover kite book view eight stuff angle legend defense` is account:
  Secret seed:      0xa05c75731970cc7868a2fb7cb577353cd5b31f62dccced92c441acd8fee0c92d
  Public key (hex): 0xfec70cfbf1977c6965b5af10a4534a6a35d548eb14580594d0bc543286892515
  Account ID:       0xfec70cfbf1977c6965b5af10a4534a6a35d548eb14580594d0bc543286892515
  SS58 Address:     5Hpm9fq3W3dQgwWpAwDS2ZHKAdnk86QRCu7iX4GnmDxycrte
```

---

> ☠️ DO NT RE-USE ANY OF THE INFORMATION (seed and secrets) FROM THIS PAGE ☠️.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
☠️ DO NT RE-USE ANY OF THE SEEDS AND SECRETS FROM THIS PAGE ☠️.
```

You can read more about security and risks in [SECURITY.md](./SECURITY.md) and in the [Polkadot Wiki](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-account-generation).

---

> The output above shows a **secret phrase** (also called **mnemonic phrase**) and the **secret seed** (also called **Private Key**). Those 2 secrets are the pieces of information you MUST keep safe and secret. All the other information below can be derivated from those secrets.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The output above shows a **secret phrase** (also called **mnemonic phrase**) and the **secret seed** (also called **Private Key**). Those 2 secrets are the pieces of information you MUST keep safe and secret. All the other information below can be derived from those secrets.
```

The output above also show the **public key** and the **Account ID**. Those are the independant from the network where you will use the key.

The **SS58 address** (or **Public Address**) of a new account is a reprensentation of the public keys of an account for a given network (for instance Kusama or Polkadot).

For instance, considering the previous seed `0xa05c75731970cc7868a2fb7cb577353cd5b31f62dccced92c441acd8fee0c92d` the SS58 addresses are:
- Polkadot: `16m4J167Mptt8UXL8aGSAi7U2FnPpPxZHPrCgMG9KJzVoFqM`

> - Kusama: `JLNozAv8QeLSbLFwe2UvWeKKE4yvmDbfGxTuiYkF2BUMx4M`

Reviewer 3: GIven this might be surprising to new users it'd be good to include a link to our docs the expound on the motivation for this setup – why do we have chain-specific SS58 addresses?

Author: Added

### Json output

> `subkey` can calso generate the output as *json*. This is useful for automation:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`subkey` can calso generate the output as *json*. This is useful for automation.
```

command:
```
subkey generate --output-type json
```

output:
```
{
  "accountId": "0xfec70cfbf1977c6965b5af10a4534a6a35d548eb14580594d0bc543286892515",
  "publicKey": "0xfec70cfbf1977c6965b5af10a4534a6a35d548eb14580594d0bc543286892515",
  "secretPhrase": "hotel forest jar hover kite book view eight stuff angle legend defense",
  "secretSeed": "0xa05c75731970cc7868a2fb7cb577353cd5b31f62dccced92c441acd8fee0c92d",
  "ss58Address": "5Hpm9fq3W3dQgwWpAwDS2ZHKAdnk86QRCu7iX4GnmDxycrte"
}
```

So if you only want to get the `secretSeed` for instance, you can use:

command:
```
subkey generate --output-type json | jq -r .secretSeed
```

output:
```
0xa05c75731970cc7868a2fb7cb577353cd5b31f62dccced92c441acd8fee0c92d
```

### Inspecting a key

> You can inspect a given URI (mnemonic, seed, public key, or address) and recover the public key and the address.

Reviewer 3: I know the URI standard covers a lot of stuff, but I'm not sure you can call a mnemonic phrase a URI?

Author: I will fix the wording here and add more details.

    subkey inspect <mnemonic | seed | pubkey | address>

*Example Output*:

```
Secret Key URI `0xa05c75731970cc7868a2fb7cb577353cd5b31f62dccced92c441acd8fee0c92d` is account:
  Secret seed:      0xa05c75731970cc7868a2fb7cb577353cd5b31f62dccced92c441acd8fee0c92d
  Public key (hex): 0xfec70cfbf1977c6965b5af10a4534a6a35d548eb14580594d0bc543286892515
  Account ID:       0xfec70cfbf1977c6965b5af10a4534a6a35d548eb14580594d0bc543286892515
  SS58 Address:     5Hpm9fq3W3dQgwWpAwDS2ZHKAdnk86QRCu7iX4GnmDxycrte
```
### Signing

`subkey` allows using a **secret key** to sign a random message. The signature can then be verified by anyone using your **public key**:

>     echo -n <msg> | subkey sign --suri <seed,mnemonic>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    echo -n <msg> | subkey sign --suri <seed|mnemonic>
```

It's either the one or the other right?

*Example*:

    MESSAGE=hello
    SURI=0xa05c75731970cc7868a2fb7cb577353cd5b31f62dccced92c441acd8fee0c92d
    echo -n $MESSAGE | subkey sign --suri $SURI

*outputs*:

    9201af3788ad4f986b800853c79da47155f2e08fde2070d866be4c27ab060466fea0623dc2b51f4392f4c61f25381a62848dd66c5d8217fae3858e469ebd668c

> **NOTE**: Each run of the `sign` command with yield a different output. While each signature is different, they are all valid.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**NOTE**: Each run of the `sign` command will yield a different output. While each signature is different, they are all valid.
```

    Error: SignatureInvalid

### Using the vanity generator

You can use the included vanity generator to find a seed that provides an address which includes the desired pattern. Be warned, depending on your hardware this may take a while.

command:
```
subkey vanity --network polkadot --pattern bob
```

output:
```
Generating key containing pattern 'bob'
best: 190 == top: 189
Secret Key URI `0x8c9a73097f235b84021a446bc2826a00c690ea0be3e0d81a84931cb4146d6691` is account:
  Secret seed:      0x8c9a73097f235b84021a446bc2826a00c690ea0be3e0d81a84931cb4146d6691
  Public key (hex): 0x1a8b32e95c1f571118ea0b84801264c3c70f823e320d099e5de31b9b1f18f843
  Account ID:       0x1a8b32e95c1f571118ea0b84801264c3c70f823e320d099e5de31b9b1f18f843
  SS58 Address:     1bobYxBPjZWRPbVo35aSwci1u5Zmq8P6J2jpa4kkudBZMqE
```

`Bob` now got a nice address starting with his name: 1**bob**YxBPjZWRPbVo35aSwci1u5Zmq8P6J2jpa4kkudBZMqE.

**Note**: While `Bob`, having a short name (3 chars), got a result rather quickly, it will take much longer for `Alice` who has a much longer name, thus the chances to generate a random address that contains the chain `alice` will be much smaller.

### Signing a transaction

> Sign a transaction from an encoded `Call`.

Reviewer 3: s/from/for/ maybe?

    subkey sign-transaction \
        --call <call-as-hex> \
        --nonce 0 \
        --suri <secret-uri> \

>         --password <password> \

Reviewer 3: There's been no previous mention of the password in the doc, maybe worth including some info on how that works?

        --prior-block-hash <prior-block-hash-as-hex>

Will output a signed and encoded `UncheckedMortalCompactExtrinsic` as hex.

> ### Inspecting a module ID

Reviewer 3: Worth adding a brief mention on what a "module" is in this context?

Author: This command is no longer part of the code. I remove this from the doc.

}
```

So if you only want to get the `secretSeed` for instance, you can use:

command:
```
subkey generate --output-type json | jq -r .secretSeed
```

output:
```
0xa05c75731970cc7868a2fb7cb577353cd5b31f62dccced92c441acd8fee0c92d
```

### Additional user-defined password

`subkey` supports an additional user-defined secret that will be appended to the seed. Let's see the following example:

    subkey generate --password extra_secret

output:

```
Secret phrase `soup lyrics media market way crouch elevator put moon useful question wide` is account:
  Secret seed:      0xe7cfd179d6537a676cb94bac3b5c5c9cb1550e846ac4541040d077dfbac2e7fd
  Public key (hex): 0xf6a233c3e1de1a2ae0486100b460b3ce3d7231ddfe9dadabbd35ab968c70905d
  Account ID:       0xf6a233c3e1de1a2ae0486100b460b3ce3d7231ddfe9dadabbd35ab968c70905d
  SS58 Address:     5He5pZpc7AJ8evPuab37vJF6KkFDqq9uDq2WXh877Qw6iaVC
```

Using the `inspect` command (see more details below), we see that knowning only the **secret seed** is no longer sufficient to recover the account:

    subkey inspect "soup lyrics media market way crouch elevator put moon useful question wide"

> which recovers the account `5Fe4sqj2K4fRuzEGvToi4KATqZfiDU7TqynjXG6PZE2dxwyh` and not `5He5pZpc7AJ8evPuab37vJF6KkFDqq9uDq2WXh877Qw6iaVC` as we expected. The additional user-defined **password** (`extra_secret` in our example) is now required to fully recover the account. Let's inspect the the previous mnemonice, this time passing also the required `password` as shown below:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which recovers the account `5Fe4sqj2K4fRuzEGvToi4KATqZfiDU7TqynjXG6PZE2dxwyh` and not `5He5pZpc7AJ8evPuab37vJF6KkFDqq9uDq2WXh877Qw6iaVC` as we expected. The additional user-defined **password** (`extra_secret` in our example) is now required to fully recover the account. Let's inspect the the previous mnemonic, this time passing also the required `password` as shown below:
```

    subkey inspect --password extra_secret "soup lyrics media market way crouch elevator put moon useful question wide"

This time, we properly recovered `5He5pZpc7AJ8evPuab37vJF6KkFDqq9uDq2WXh877Qw6iaVC`.

### Inspecting a key

If you have *some data* about a key, `subkey inpsect` will help you discover more information about it.

If you have **secrets** that you would like to verify for instance, you can use:

    subkey inspect < mnemonic | seed >

If you have only **public data**, you can see a subset of the information:

    subkey inspect --public < pubkey | address >

**NOTE**: While you will be able to recover the secret seed from the mnemonic, the opposite is not possible.

**NOTE**: For obvious reasons, the **secrets** cannot be recovered from passing **public data** such as `pubkey` or `address` as input.

*command*:

```
subkey inspect 0xa05c75731970cc7868a2fb7cb577353cd5b31f62dccced92c441acd8fee0c92d
```

> *Output*:

Reviewer 3: Super nit: you use lowercase `output` elsewhere.

Author: fixed, with a few other similar ones

### Inspecting a key

> If you have *some data* about a key, `subkey inpsect` will help you discover more information about this key.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you have *some data* about a key, `subkey inpsect` will help you discover more information about it.
```

If you have **secrets** that you would like to verify for instance, you can use:

    subkey inspect < mnemonic | seed >

If you have only **public data**, you can see a subset of the information:

    subkey inspect --public < pubkey | address >

> **NOTE**: While you will be able to recover the secret seed from the mnemonic, the opposite is not possible.

Reviewer 3: Oh interesting, TIL!

Author: Actually, it *may* be possible but `subkey` does not allow it currently.
